DOCS-4026 APM Tutorials - python (#16069)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/tutorial-enable-python-host.md

---

> title: Tutorial - Enabling Tracing for a Python Application on the Same Host as Datadog Agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Tutorial - Enabling Tracing for a Python Application on the Same Host as the Datadog Agent
```

kind: guide
further_reading:
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/library_config/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Additional tracing library configuration options
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/dd_libraries/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Detailed tracing library setup instructions
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/compatibility/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Supported Python frameworks for automatic instrumentation
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Manually configuring traces and spans
- link: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-py
  tags: GitHub
  text: Tracing library open source code repository
---

## Overview

> This tutorial walks you through step by step enabling tracing on a sample Python application that is installed on a host. In this scenario, you install a Datadog Agent on the same host as the application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial walks you through the steps for enabling tracing on a sample Python application installed on a host. In this scenario, you install a Datadog Agent on the same host as the application. 
```

> For other scenarios, including applications in containers, Agent in a container, and applications written in other languages, see the other [Enabling Tracing tutorials][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other scenarios, including applications in containers, Agent in a container, and applications written in different languages, see the other [Enabling Tracing tutorials][1].
```

> For general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Python, see [Tracing Python Applications][2].

Reviewer: same as above

> For general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Python, see [Tracing Python Applications][2].

Author: ```suggestion
See [Tracing Python Applications][2] for general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Python.
```

### Prerequisites

- A Datadog account and [organization API key][3]
- Git
- Python that meets the [tracing library requirements][4]

## Install the Agent

If you haven't installed a Datadog Agent on your machine, go to [**Integrations > Agent**][5] and select your operating system. For example, on most Linux platforms, you can install the Agent by running the following script, replacing `<YOUR_API_KEY>` with your [Datadog API key][3]:

{{< code-block lang="bash" >}}
DD_AGENT_MAJOR_VERSION=7 DD_API_KEY=<YOUR_API_KEY> DD_SITE="datadoghq.com" bash -c "$(curl -L https://s3.amazonaws.com/dd-agent/scripts/install_script.sh)"
{{< /code-block >}}

> To send data to a Datadog site other than `datadoghq.com`, replace the `DD_SITE` environment variable with [the site that you use][6].

Reviewer: same as above

> To send data to a Datadog site other than `datadoghq.com`, replace the `DD_SITE` environment variable with [the site that you use][6].

Author: ```suggestion
To send data to a Datadog site other than `datadoghq.com`, replace the `DD_SITE` environment variable with [your Datadog site][6].
```

: Adds a note with the description `otherNote` and an ID value of `2`. Returns `( 2, otherNote)`

`curl -X GET 'localhost:8080/notes'`
: Returns the contents of the database: `{ "1": "hello", "2": "otherNote" }`

`curl -X PUT 'localhost:8080/notes?id=1&desc=UpdatedNote'`
: Updates the description value for the first note to `UpdatedNote`.

`curl -X DELETE 'localhost:8080/notes?id=1'`
: Removes the first note from the database.

Run more API calls to see the application in action. When you're done, type Ctrl+C to stop the application.

## Install Datadog tracing

Next, install the tracing library by using Poetry or pip (minimum version 18). From your `apm-tutorial-python` directory, run:

{{% tabs %}}

{{< tab "Poetry" >}}

```bash
poetry add ddtrace
poetry install

```

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab "pip" >}}

```bash
pip install ddtrace
```

{{< /tab >}}

{{% /tabs %}}

## Launch the Python application with automatic instrumentation

To start generating and collecting traces, restart the sample application in a slightly different way than previously. Run:

{{< code-block lang="bash" >}}DD_SERVICE=notes DD_ENV=dev DD_VERSION=0.1.0 \
 ddtrace-run python -m notes_app.app{{< /code-block >}}

> That command sets the `DD_SERVICE`, `DD_VERSION`, and `DD_ENV` environment variable to enable [Unified Service Tagging][10], enabling data correlation across Datadog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That command sets the `DD_SERVICE`, `DD_VERSION`, and `DD_ENV` environment variables to enable [Unified Service Tagging][10], enabling data correlation across Datadog.
```

A `GET /notes` trace looks something like this:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-host-get-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a GET trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

## Add custom instrumentation to the Python application

While automatic instrumentation is convenient, sometimes you want more fine-grained spans. Datadog's Python DD Trace API allows you to specify spans within your code using annotations or code.

The following steps walk you through adding annotations to the code to trace some sample methods.

1. Open `notes_app/notes_helper.py`.
2. Add the following import:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace import tracer{{< /code-block >}}

3. Inside the `NotesHelper` class, add a tracer wrapper called `notes_helper` to better see how the `notes_helper.long_running_process` method works:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}class NotesHelper:

    @tracer.wrap(service="notes_helper")
    def long_running_process(self):
        time.sleep(.3)
        logging.info("Hello from the long running process")
        self.__private_method_1(){{< /code-block >}}

>     Now, the tracer automatically labels the resource with the function name it is wrapped around, in this case `long_running_process`.

Reviewer: same as above

>     Now, the tracer automatically labels the resource with the function name it is wrapped around, in this case `long_running_process`.

Author: ```suggestion
    Now, the tracer automatically labels the resource with the function name it is wrapped around, in this case, `long_running_process`.
```

4. Resend some HTTP requests, specifically some `GET` requests.
5. On the Trace Explorer, click into one of the new `GET` requests, and see a flame graph like this:

   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-host-custom-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a GET trace with custom instrumentation." style="width:100%;" >}}
   
   Note the higher level of detail in the stack trace now that the `get_notes` function has custom tracing.

For more information, read [Custom Instrumentation][12].

## Add a second application to see distributed traces

> Tracing a single application is a great start, but the real value in tracing comes when you can see how requests are flowing through your services. This is called _distributed tracing_. 

Reviewer: same as above

> Tracing a single application is a great start, but the real value in tracing comes when you can see how requests are flowing through your services. This is called _distributed tracing_. 

Author: ```suggestion
Tracing a single application is a great start, but the real value in tracing is seeing how requests flow through your services. This is called _distributed tracing_. 
```

The sample project includes a second application called `calendar_app` that returns a random date whenever it is invoked. The `POST` endpoint in the Notes application has a second query parameter named `add_date`. When it is set to `y`, Notes calls the calendar application to get a date to add to the note.

1. Start the calendar application by running:

   {{< code-block lang="bash" >}}
DD_SERVICE=calendar DD_ENV=dev DD_VERSION=0.1.0 \ 
ddtrace-run python -m calendar_app.app
   {{< /code-block >}}

2. Send a POST request with the `add_date` parameter:

`curl -X POST 'localhost:8080/notes?desc=hello_again&add_date=y'`
: `(2, hello_again with date 2022-11-06)`

3. In the Trace Explorer, click this latest trace to see a distributed trace between the two services:

   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-host-distributed.png" alt="A flame graph for a distributed trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

## Add more custom instrumentation

> As previously mentioned, you can add custom instrumentation by using code. Supposed you want to further instrument the calendar service in order to better see the trace. 

Reviewer: same as above

1. Open `notes_app/notes_logic.py`. 
2. Add the following import

   ```python
   from ddtrace import tracer
   ```
3. Inside the `try` block, at about line 28, add the following `with` statement:

   ```python
   with tracer.trace(name="notes_helper", service="notes_helper", resource="another_process") as span:
   ```
   Resulting in this:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}
def create_note(self, desc, add_date=None):
        if (add_date):
            if (add_date.lower() == "y"):
                try:
                    with tracer.trace(name="notes_helper", service="notes_helper", resource="another_process") as span:
                        self.nh.another_process()
                    note_date = requests.get(f"http://localhost:9090/calendar")
                    note_date = note_date.text
                    desc = desc + " with date " + note_date
                    print(desc)
                except Exception as e:
                    print(e)
                    raise IOError("Cannot reach calendar service.")
        note = Note(description=desc, id=None)
        note.id = self.db.create_note(note){{< /code-block >}}

> 4. Send some more HTTP requests, specifically `POST` requests with the `add_date` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Send more HTTP requests, specifically `POST` requests, with the `add_date` argument.
```
